The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

Copyright © Jonathan Bennett 2017. All rights reserved
[Brackets] enclose editorial explanations. Small ·dots· enclose material that has been added, but can be read as
though it were part of the original text. Occasional •bullets, and also indenting of passages that are not quotations,
are meant as aids to grasping the structure of a sentence or a thought. Every four-point ellipsis . . . . indicates the
omission of a brief passage that seems to present more difﬁculty than it is worth. Longer omissions are reported
between brackets in normal-sized type.—The division into twenty-six chapters is Machiavelli’s; the division into
two Parts is not.—Previous translations that have been continuously consulted are:

—translated and edited by Robert Martin Adams (Norton Critical Edition, 1977). Don’t confuse this Adams (b.
1915) with the now better-known Robert Merrihew Adams (b. 1937). [borrowed from on pages 35 and 45]
—translated by Russell Price and edited by Quentin Skinner (Cambridge U. P., 1988) [borrowed from on

page 40]

—edited and translated by Peter Constantine (Modern Library, 2007),
—translated by Tim Parks (Penguin Classics, 2009). [borrowed from on page 53]

Of these, the most swingingly readable version is Parks’s, though it embellishes the original more than any other
version, including the present one. Each of the other three has helpful explanatory notes. Parks has a ’glossary of
proper names’. The present version received many small helps from these predecessors in addition to the four
acknowledged above.
First launched: August 2010

The Prince

Contents

Niccolò Machiavelli

Dedication: To his Magniﬁcence Lorenzo Di Piero De’ Medici

Part I: Kinds of principality; how to get and retain them
Chapter 1: Different kinds of principalities, and how to acquire them

Chapter 2: Hereditary principalities

Chapter 3: Mixed principalities

Chapter 4: Why Darius’s kingdom, conquered by Alexander, didn’t rebel against his successors after his death

Chapter 5: How to govern cities or principalities that lived under their own laws before they were annexed

Chapter 6: New principalities that are acquired by one’s own arms and virtù

Chapter 7: New principalities acquired by the arms and the fortuna of others

Chapter 8: Principality obtained through wickedness

Chapter 9: Civil principality

Chapter 10: How to measure the strength of a principality

Chapter 11: Ecclesiastical principalities

Part II: Other aspects of political power
Chapter 12: Different kinds of armies; Mercenaries

Chapter 13: Auxiliaries, mixed armies, citizen armies

Chapter 14: A prince’s military duties

1

2

2

2

3

8

10

11

13

17

20

22

24

26

26

29

31

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

Chapter 15: Things for which men, especially princes, are praised or blamed

Chapter 16: The free spender and the tightwad

Chapter 17: Cruelty and mercy. Is it better to be loved than feared?

Chapter 18: How princes should keep their word

Chapter 19: How to avoid attracting contempt and hatred

Chapter 20: Are fortresses, and other princely devices, advantageous or hurtful?

Chapter 21: What a prince should do to acquire prestige

Chapter 22: The ministers of princes

Chapter 23: How to avoid ﬂatterers

Chapter 24: Why the princes of Italy have lost their states

Chapter 25: The role of fortuna in human affairs and how to withstand it

Chapter 26: A plea to liberate Italy from the barbarians

33

34

35

37

39

44

46

48

49

51

52

54

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

Glossary

Africa: At the time Machiavelli is writing about on page 18,
‘Africa’ named a coastal strip of north Africa, including some
of what are now Tunisia, Algeria, and Libya. The site of city
Carthage is now the site of a suburb of Tunis.
element: On page 5 Machiavelli speaks of ‘the more weak’
and ‘the more strong’, with no noun. He could be talking
about (i) weaker and stronger individuals or factions within
the acquired state, or (ii) weaker and stronger substates or
provinces of which the newly acquired state is made up. The
rest of that chapter hooks into (ii); but page 5 also makes
Machiavellian sense when taken in the manner of (i); perhaps
he meant to be talking about both at once.
fortuna: This word occurs nearly 60 times in the work.
Most occurrences of it could be translated by ‘luck’, but
for Machiavelli its meaning is clearly broader than that—
something more like ‘circumstances beyond one’s control’.
The interplay between this and virtù is a dominant theme
in The Prince.
[For a superb discussion of this theme, see J. G. A.
Pocock’s The Machiavellian Moment (Princeton University Press, 2003),
chapter 6.] So fortuna is left untranslated except where
Machiavelli writes of someone’s privata fortuna, meaning
his status or condition as an ordinary citizen (rather than
someone with rank and power). The ﬁve occurrences of this
are all translated by ‘ordinary citizen’. Italian lets us choose
between ‘it’ and ‘she’ for fortuna, but nothing in this work
invites us to personalize it except the striking last paragraph
on page 53.
free: When Machiavelli speaks of people as living free (liberi)
or in freedom (in libertà) he usually means that they are
self-governing rather than being subjects of a prince. (An
exception is liberissime on page 23.) On page 10 there is

a good example of why it won’t do to translate libertà by
‘self-government’ throughout or to translate it sometimes by
‘self-government’ and sometimes by ‘freedom’.
gentlemen: This seems to be the best we can do with
Machiavelli’s gentili uomini, but his meaning seems to be
something more like ‘men who have some kind of rank or
title’. Thus, ‘making them his gentlemen’ [page 14] means
‘giving each of them some kind of rank or title or standing at
his own court or within his own government’.
prince: In this work principe isn’t a title and doesn’t desig-
nate a rank; it stands for any ruler of a state, whether a king
or queen or duke or count etc. The English word ‘prince’ also
had that broad meaning once (Queen Elizabeth I referred to
herself as a ‘prince’), and it seems the best word to use here.
temporal: It means ‘having to do with this world as distinct
from the heavenly world of the after-life’. The underlying
thought is that this world is in time (‘temporal’) whereas the
after-life is eternal in some way that puts it outside time.
virtù: This word occurs 60 times in this work, and its
cognate adjective virtuoso occurs another dozen times. A
dominant theme throughout is the difference between virtù
and fortuna as factors in a man’s life. Usually virtù means
something like ‘ability’, but it can mean ‘strength’ or even
‘virtue’. It is left untranslated so that you can make your
own decisions about what Machiavelli means by it on a given
occasion.
you: Machiavelli sometimes switches suddenly from talking
about •what a prince must do to talking about •what you
must do, as though he were addressing the prince. Any such
switch (the ﬁrst is on page 3) is Machiavelli’s own and not
an artifact of this version.

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

Dedication

Dedication

To his Magniﬁcence Lorenzo Di Piero De’ Medici

Those who try to win the favour of a prince usually come to
him with things that they regard as most precious, or that
they see him take most pleasure in; so we often we often
see princes being presented with horses, arms, cloth of gold,
precious stones, and similar ornaments that are worthy of
their greatness.

Wanting to present myself to your Magniﬁcence with some
testimony of my devotion towards you, the possession of
mine that I love best and value most is my knowledge of
the actions of great men—knowledge that I have acquired
from long experience in contemporary affairs and from a
continual study of antiquity. Having reﬂected on it long and
hard, I now send it, digested into a little volume, to your
Magniﬁcence.

Without being sure that this work is worthy of being pre-
sented to you, I am trusting that you will be kind enough to
ﬁnd it acceptable, seeing that I can’t give you anything better
than the opportunity to get a grasp, quickly, of everything
that it has taken me so many difﬁcult and dangerous years
to learn. Many writers decorate their work—choke their
work—with smoothly sweeping sentences, pompous words,
and other ‘attractions’ that are irrelevant to the matter in
hand; but I haven’t done any of that, because I have wanted
this work of mine to be given only such respect as it can get
from the importance of its topic and the truth of what it says
about it.

Some people think it would be presumptuous for a man
whose status is low to •discuss the concerns of princes and
•give them rules for how to behave; but I don’t agree. A
landscape painter will place himself •on the plain in order

to get a good view of the mountains, and •on a mountain in
order to get a good view of the plain. So also, to understand
the nature of the people one needs to be a prince, and to
understand the nature of princes one needs to be of the
people.

Take then this little gift in the spirit in which I send
it. If you read and think about it, you’ll see how greatly I
want you to achieve that greatness which fortune and your
other attributes promise. And if your Magniﬁcence, from the
mountain-top of your greatness will sometimes look down
at this plain, you will see how little I deserve the wretched
ill-fortune that continually pursues me.
[1. Machiavelli worked for 18 years for the Florentine Republic; when the
Republic collapsed in 1512 under attack by the Medici and their allies, he

•lost his elevated government position,
•was accused of conspiracy, questioned under torture, then re-
leased, and
•retired to his farm, where he wrote The Prince and other works.

After six or seven years of this, Machiavelli

•did administrative work for some Florentine merchants,
•was consulted by the Medici government on a policy question,
•returned to Florence where he was celebrated as a writer,
•was engaged by Cardinal de’ Medici to write a history of Florence,
•hoped to re-enter high levels of government when in 1527
the Medici were again ejected and the Florentine republic re-
established, but
•died in June 1527.

The continuing ‘wretched ill-fortune’ of which he writes consisted in
poverty and the lack of worthy employment during his years on the farm.
The Prince was not published until after his death.
2. The recipient of the Dedication was not the famous ‘Lorenzo the
Magniﬁcent’ (patron of Leonardo, Michelangelo etc.), but a grandson of
his.]

1

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

2: Hereditary principalities

Part I

Kinds of principality

How to get and retain them

Chapter 1

Different kinds of principalities, and how to acquire them

All states, all powers that rule over men, are either republics
or principalities. (I am saying all this about the past as well
as the present.)

Principalities are either hereditary, governed by one

family over very many years, or they are new.

A new principality may be entirely new, as Milan was to
Francesco Sforza, or it may be (so to speak) a limb grafted
onto the hereditary state of the prince who has acquired it,
as when the kingdom of Naples was acquired by—·grafted

onto·—the kingdom of Spain.

A dominion acquired in this way (1) may have been
accustomed—·before the acquisition·—to live under a prince,
or may have lived in freedom [see Glossary]; and the acquisition
(2) may have happened through the arms of the ·acquiring·
prince himself, or through the arms of others; and the
acquisition (3) may have been a matter of fortuna [see Glossary]
or a product of virtù.

Chapter 2

Hereditary principalities

I shan’t discuss republics, because I have written about
them at length elsewhere. My sole topic here will be princi-
palities. My presentation will be organised in terms of the
classiﬁcation given in chapter 1, and will discuss how such
principalities are to be ruled and preserved.

I say at the outset that it is easier to hold a hereditary
state that has long been accustomed to their princely family
than it is to hold a new state. A hereditary prince doesn’t
have to work very hard to retain his state; all he needs is
to •abide by the customs of his ancestors and •get himself

2

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

3: Mixed principalities

through minor emergencies; unless of course some extraor-
dinary and extreme force deprives him of his state, and even
then he will get it back if the usurper runs into trouble.

We have an example in Italy: the Duke of Ferrara couldn’t
have survived the attacks of the Venetians in 1484 or those
of Pope Julius in 1510 if he hadn’t been long established in
his dominions. [This is about two Dukes of Ferrara—Ercole in 1484
and Alfonso in 1510. Perhaps Machiavelli’s singular ‘Duke’ was meant
to make the point that within a single hereditary principality it doesn’t
matter much who is the prince at a given time.] Because a hereditary
prince has less cause to offend ·his people·, and less need

to do so, he will be more loved—his subjects will naturally
think well of him unless extraordinary vices cause them to
hate him.
the next sentence: E nella antiquità e continuazione del
dominio sono spente le memorie e le cagioni delle innovazioni:
perché sempre una mutazione lascia lo addentellato per la
ediﬁcazione dell’altra.
literally meaning: And in the antiquity and duration of his
rule the memories and motives that make for change are lost,
for one change always prepares the way for the next.
what Machiavelli is getting at: ??

Chapter 3

Mixed principalities

Where difﬁculties arise is in a new principality. Let us take
ﬁrst the case of a principality that isn’t entirely new, but is (so
to speak) a limb of a larger state which taken as a whole could
be called ‘composite’—·a combination of old and new, an old
state to which another state has been newly annexed·. The
changes through which new principalities come into being
always have a built-in source of difﬁculty: men who change
their rulers willingly are hoping to better themselves, which
is what gets them to take up arms against their present ruler;
and they are deceived in this, because they ·always· discover
in due course that they have gone from bad to worse. Why?
Because a new prince ordinarily—naturally—has to burden
those who have submitted to him with ·the requirement that

they provide quarters for· his troops and with countless other
hardships. So you [see Glossary] have as enemies [inimici] all
those whom you have harmed in seizing that principality;
and you can’t keep the friends [amici] who put you there
because •you can’t satisfy them in the way they expected,
and •you can’t take strong measures against them because
you still need them. For however strong your armed forces
are, in entering a new province you will need the goodwill
of the people of the place. That is why Louis XII of France
quickly took Milan, and quickly lost it. To turn him out the
ﬁrst time it only needed Lodovico’s own forces [i.e. the forces
of the duke who had been conquered by Louis], because those who
had opened Milan’s gates to King Louis, ﬁnding themselves

3

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

3: Mixed principalities

deceived in their hopes of beneﬁting from this, wouldn’t
endure the harsh treatment they were getting from their new
ruler.

When a rebellious province is retaken, it won’t be so easily
lost a second time, because the prince will have learned from
the rebellion not to hesitate to punish the delinquents, to
sort out the suspects, and to ﬁx any weaknesses in his
position. Thus, whereas Duke Lodovico could take Milan
back from France the ﬁrst time merely by sword-rattling
along its borders, to get it back a second time he needed
everyone’s help in defeating the French armies and driving
them out of Italy. The reasons why ·this was so difﬁcult· are
the ones I have just presented.

Still, Milan was taken back from France not just once
but twice. I have discussed the general reasons for the ﬁrst
·French failure·; it remains to name those for the second.
What resources did the French king have? How might
someone in his situation have held on to his conquest better
than he did?

Distinguish two cases: when a state with a long history
acquires a new dominion, either (a) the new dominion has
the same language as the other and is geographically right
next to it, or (b) it doesn’t and isn’t.
In any case of kind
(a) it is easier to hold onto the new dominion, especially if
its people haven’t been accustomed to live in freedom; to
hold it securely one needs only to destroy the family of the
prince who was its ruler; because then, with conditions
·in the new dominion· the same as before, and with pretty
much the same customs established in the two territories,
the people will live quietly together. We have seen this in
Brittany, Burgundy, Gascony, and Normandy, which have
stayed united to France for such a long time. And though
there may be some difference in language, the customs are
alike and the peoples can easily get on with one another.

Someone who acquires such a state, if he wants to hold
onto it, must take care of two (and only two) things: •that
the family of this state’s former prince is extinguished; and
•that neither the laws or their taxes are altered. With those
things taken care of, it won’t take long for the newly acquired
dominion to become entirely one body with the long-standing
principality that has annexed it.

But when (b) a country acquires a state that differs from
it in language, customs, or laws, there are difﬁculties, and
holding on to the new acquisition requires good fortuna and
great energy. One of the best things that the acquiring ruler
can do is to go and live in the newly acquired state, which
would make his position more secure and durable. That’s
what it did for the Turk in •Greece: despite all his other
measures for holding •that state, if he hadn’t settled there
he couldn’t have kept it. ·There are at least three reasons
for this·. (1) If the ruler is on the spot, he can see troubles
as they arise and can quickly deal with them; whereas if
he isn’t there he won’t hear of them until they have grown
beyond the point where he can ﬁx them. (2) ·If you are living
there·, the country won’t be pillaged by your ofﬁcials, ·and if
that does start to happen· your subjects will be glad to have
immediate access to their on-the-spot prince. (3) Subjects
who are well-disposed towards the prince will have more
reason to love him; and those who aren’t will have more
reason to fear him. Anyone wanting to attack that state from
the outside had better go about it carefully: as long as the
prince is living there it will be very hard to take it from him.
An even better procedure is to send colonies to one or two
places within the newly acquired state, to serve as shackles
(so to speak). It’s a choice between doing this and keeping
there a large garrison of cavalry and infantry. Establishing
and maintaining a colony costs little or nothing; and the
only •people who are offended by are the minority whose

4

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

3: Mixed principalities

lands and houses are given to the new inhabitants, ·the
colonists·; and •they can’t do ·the prince· any harm, because
they are poor and scattered. And the remainder are easily
kept quiet—•they haven’t been injured, and anyway •they
don’t want to put a foot wrong for fear of being treated in the
same way as the dispossessed minority. . . . ·This illustrates
a general point, namely that· men should be treated in such
a way that there’s no fear of their seeking revenge—either
•well-treated ·so that they won’t want revenge· or •utterly
crushed so that they won’t be capable of it.

It costs much more to have an armed garrison than to
have colonies; maintaining it can take the entire income
of the ·newly acquired· state, so that the acquisition of it
turns into a loss. Also, shifting the garrison from place to
place ·with a constant need to take over people’s homes as
quarters for the soldiers· makes everyone angry; everyone
suffers hardship and becomes hostile; and these are enemies
who can still do harm because although they have been
beaten they are still on their own ground. However you look
at it, military occupation is as useless as colonisation is
useful.

A prince who takes power in a country differing in laws
and language ·from his own people· ought to •make himself
the head and defender of the weaker of his new subjects,
and to •weaken the more powerful amongst them; and also
•to see to it that no foreigner as powerful as himself ever
gets a footing there. If that does happen, it will be because
the foreigner was invited in by subjects who are driven by
ambition or by fear. We see this •in the entry of the Romans
into Greece, invited in by the Aetolians, and •in every other
country that they entered at the invitation of the inhabitants.
What usually happens when a powerful foreigner enters a
country is that the weaker •elements [see Glossary] side with
him, motivated by their hatred for the ruling power, so that

he doesn’t have to work at getting them on his side. He has
only to take care that they don’t get too much power and
authority; and then with his own forces and their goodwill, he
can easily keep the more powerful •elements under control
and thus remain entirely master in the country. A ruler
who doesn’t properly manage this business will soon lose his
acquisition, and for as long as he does have it it will give him
endless difﬁculties and troubles.

The Romans went about things in just this way in the

countries they annexed. They

—sent colonies,
—maintained friendly relations with the less powerful

•elements, without increasing their power,

—kept down the more powerful •elements, and
—didn’t allow any strong foreign powers to gain authority.
One example of this will be enough, I think—Greece.
The Romans kept on friendly terms with the Achaeans
and Aetolians, and humbled the kingdom of Macedonia,
driving Antiochus out; but the services of the Achaeans and
Aetolians didn’t win them any permission to increase their
power; Philip wasn’t able to talk his way into friendship with
the Romans until they had ﬁrst humbled him; and the power
of Antiochus didn’t make them consent to his having any
political status in that province [Macedonia]. What the Romans
did in these cases should be done by any prudent prince who
is concerned not only with present troubles but also with
future ones. He must work really hard to prepare for those:
they are easy to cure if you look ahead to them, whereas if
you do nothing until they are almost upon you it will be too
late for medicine—the malady will have become incurable.
[Machiavelli compares this with what the physicians say
about tuberculosis:
in its early stages, hard to spot but
easy to cure; later on, visible to everyone but incurable. He
continues:] That’s how it is in affairs of state.
If future

5

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

3: Mixed principalities

troubles are foreseen (which they can be, but only by very
intelligent people), they can be quickly ﬁxed; but if they
aren’t foreseen and are therefore allowed to grow to a size
where everyone can see them, they are beyond cure.

Accordingly the Romans, foreseeing troubles well ahead
of time, dealt with them ahead of time. They wouldn’t let
them come to the boil, even if preventing them from doing
so involved going to war; for they knew that ·in situations
like that· war can’t be avoided, and putting it off will work
to the advantage of others. So they chose to ﬁght Philip and
Antiochus in Greece so as not to have to ﬁght them ·later on·
in Italy; they might have avoided both, but they chose not to
·try that way out·. And they weren’t believers in the saying
that we constantly hear from the ‘wise’ men of our own day—

Let us enjoy the beneﬁts of the passing of time

—because they were more interested in the beneﬁts of their
own virtù and foresight! ·They knew that it’s no good relying
for help on the sheer passage of time·, because time herds
everything along, bringing good things as well as bad, bad
things as well as good.

Let us turn now to France and inquire whether it did any
of the things I have been talking about. I will speak of Louis
XII and not ·his predecessor on the French throne· Charles
VIII, because Louis had possessions in Italy for longer, so it
is easier to see his conduct. What we ﬁnd is that he did the
opposite of what is needed if one is to retain a ·conquered·
state differing from one’s own in language and laws.

King Louis was brought into Italy by the ambition of the
Venetians, who planned to get control of half the state of
Lombardy ·while letting him have the other half·.
I don’t
blame the king for his part in the affair; he wanted a foothold
in Italy, and had no friends there—indeed he found all doors
barred against him because of King Charles’s behaviour—so
he had to take what friendships he could get. He might

have carried things off very successfully if it weren’t for the
mistakes he made in his other arrangements. By taking
Lombardy, the king quickly regained the reputation lost by
Charles. Genoa yielded, the Florentines turned friendly, and
he was approached with professions of friendship by

•the Marquis of Mantua,
•the Duke of Ferrara,
•the Bentivogli (of Bologna),
•the Lady of Forlì [the popular label for Caterina Sforza, the
Countess Forlì],
•the lords of Faenza, Pesaro, Rimini, Camerino,
Piombino, and
•the citizens of Lucca, Pisa, and Siena.

At this point the Venetians began to see the folly of what they
had done: in order to acquire a couple of towns in Lombardy
they had made the ·French· king master of two thirds of
Italy.

Consider how easily the king could have maintained his
position in Italy if he had observed the rules that I have set
down, and become the protector and defender of his new
friends. Though numerous, they were weak and timid, some
afraid of the Venetians, others of the Church, and thus all
compelled to stick by him; and with their help he could
easily have protected himself against the remaining great
powers. But no sooner was he established in Milan than
he did exactly the wrong thing, helping Pope Alexander to
occupy Romagna [a part of Italy that included three of the city-states
listed above]. It didn’t occur to him that by doing this he was
weakening himself, driving away his friends and those who
had thrown themselves into his arms, while strengthening
the Church by adding vast political power to the spiritual
power that already gives it so much authority. Having made
this ﬁrst mistake, he was forced deal with its consequences.
To limit Pope Alexander’s ambition to become master of

6

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

3: Mixed principalities

Tuscany, he had to come to Italy in person. [Tuscany, a large
territory that includes Florence, is Romagna’s southern neighbour.] And
as if it weren’t enough to have •made the Church powerful
and •deprived himself of his friends, the king •went after
the kingdom of Naples and divided it with King Ferdinand
II of Spain. Having been the chief power in Italy, he thus
brought in a partner who could attract to himself everyone
in the kingdom who was ambitious on his own account or
dissatisﬁed with Louis. He could have left the King of Naples
on his throne as a caretaker on his behalf, instead of which
he threw him out, replacing him by someone—·the King of
Spain·—who was capable of driving out Louis himself.

It’s a very natural and common thing to want to acquire
·territory·; men do it whenever they can, and they are praised
for this or ·anyway· not blamed. But when they can’t pull it
off and yet push ahead regardless, that is folly and they are
to blame for it. If Louis could have ·successfully· attacked
Naples with his own forces, he ought to have done that; if he
couldn’t, then he oughtn’t to have divided it ·between himself
and another king·. Dividing Lombardy between himself and
the Venetians was excusable because it gave him a foothold
in Italy; but he had no need to divide Naples, so he was at
fault for doing so.

So Louis (1) eliminated the minor powers, (2) increased
the strength of one of Italy’s greater powers, (3) brought in a
foreign power, (4) didn’t settle in the country, and (5) didn’t
establish colonies. But these errors wouldn’t have done him
any harm during his lifetime if he hadn’t also (6) deprived the
Venetians of their power. If he hadn’t (2) strengthened the
Church or (3) brought Spain into Italy, it would have been
reasonable, even necessary, to humble the Venetians; but
given that he did take those other two steps, he ought never
to have consented to pulling down the Venetians. As long as
the Venetians remained ·militarily· strong, they would have

protected Lombardy from attacks from the outside: they
would never have permitted such an attack unless it led to
their getting more territory; and no state would want to take
·any part of· Lombardy from France in order to give it to
the Venetians! Nor would any state have had the courage to
tackle both Venice and France together.

If anyone objects:

King Louis let the Pope have Romagna and let Spain
have ·half of· the kingdom of Naples to avoid war,

I repeat what I have already said, namely that you should
never let yourself be driven off-course by your desire to avoid
a war, because ·in such a case· you won’t avoid it but will
merely postpone it to your disadvantage. . . .

So King Louis lost Lombardy through not doing any of
the things that others have done when taking possession
of countries and wanting to keep them. There’s nothing
weird or mysterious about this; it is all very reasonable and
natural. During a conversation about these matters that
I had in Nantes with the Cardinal of Rouen, he remarked
that the Italians don’t understand war, and I replied that the
French don’t understand politics, because if they did they
wouldn’t have allowed the Church to become so powerful.
[Machiavelli explains that this happened when Romagna was under the
control of ‘Duke Valentino, as Cesare Borgia, son to Pope Alexander,
was commonly called’; this being an upshot of the aggrandizing of the
Church that Machiavelli complains of. His remark to the cardinal was a
warning, a prediction.] And so it turned out: France caused the
Church and Spain to be great powers in Italy, which then
led to France’s downfall. We can get from this a general rule
which never—or hardly ever—fails, namely: someone who
•causes someone else to become powerful brings about his
own ruin; because it takes skill or power to do •that, and
these attributes will be seen as threatening by the one who
has beneﬁted from them.

7

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

4: Why no rebellion?

Chapter 4:

Why Darius’s kingdom, conquered by Alexander the Great,

didn’t rebel against his successors after his death

Alexander the Great conquered Asia in a few years, and
died before getting a proper hold on it. Given how hard
it is to hold onto newly acquired States, one might have
thought that the whole territory would rise in revolt. And
yet—seemingly strangely—his successors managed to hold
on, with no troubles except ones arising from their own
ambition and mutual jealousies.

Why? Here is my explanation. All the principalities of
which we have any record have been governed in one of two
ways:

(1) by a prince with the help of others whom he appoints
to serve as his ministers in governing the kingdom,
·and whom he can dismiss at will·;

(2) by a prince together with his barons whose rank isn’t
given to them by him but is possessed by hereditary
right.

These barons have lands of their own, and subjects who
recognize them as their lords and are naturally devoted
to them. Where a prince rules through his servants or
ministers, he has more authority, because throughout the
land he’s the only person the people recognize as above them.
If they obey anyone else, they’re obeying him merely as a
minister or ofﬁcial, and they have no special love for him.

These two forms of government are illustrated in our
(1) The
own day by the Turk and the King of France.
whole Turkish empire is governed by one lord, with everyone
else ·who is involved in government· being his servants.
Dividing his kingdom into Districts, he sends them different

administrators whom he shifts and changes at his pleasure.
(2) The King of France is surrounded by a host of nobles with
long-established hereditary titles, each acknowledged and
loved by his own subjects, and each with a high rank that
the King can deprive him of only at his peril.

If you think about the difference between these two States,
you’ll see that (1a) it would be hard to conquer that of the
Turk but that once conquered (1b) it would be easy to hold
onto.
(a) Hard to conquer because an invader can’t be
brought in by a native nobility, or expect his enterprise
to be helped by the defection of those whom the sovereign
has around him. I have explained why: it’s because all those
people are the prince’s servants and have obligations to him,
so they aren’t easily corrupted; and if they are corrupted
they can’t be much help because (as I explained earlier) they
can’t carry the people with them. So whoever attacks the
Turk must reckon on ﬁnding a united people, and will have
to rely on his own strength rather than on divisions on the
other side. (b) But if •an attacker overcomes the prince of
a country governed as Turkey is, defeating him in battle so
that his armies are beyond repair, •he has nothing more to
worry about—except for the prince’s family, and once that is
exterminated there is no-one else to fear.

(2) The opposite is the case in kingdoms governed in the
French way. (a) You can always make inroads into such a
kingdom with the help of a baron or two, because there are
always some who are disaffected and want change. I have
already explained how such people can •open the way for you

8

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

4: Why no rebellion?

to invade their country and •help you to be victorious. (b) But
the effort to hold onto this territory will involve you in endless
difﬁculties—problems concerning those who helped you and
those whom you have overthrown. It won’t be enough merely
to destroy the prince’s family, because there will be barons
who are ready to lead new revolts; you’ll never be able to
•satisfy them or •destroy them, so you’ll lose the state as
soon as they see a chance to take it from you.

Now, if you look at the kind of government that Darius
had, you’ll see that it resembled that of the Turk; so that
Alexander had ﬁrst to defeat him utterly and take control of
his territory ·with no inside help·; but after he had done that,
and Darius had died, Alexander was securely in control of
the country, for the reasons I have given. If his successors
had stayed united they could have enjoyed it undisturbed,
because the only disturbances in that kingdom came from
their own inﬁghting. But kingdoms organized in the French
way can’t be held ·by their conquerors· as easily as that.
Hence the repeated uprisings against the Romans in Spain,

Gaul, and Greece, because each of these lands was divided
up into many •smaller principalities. For while the memory
of •these lasted—·i.e. as long as people felt loyalty to their
local baron·—the Romans couldn’t feel safe. But after a
long period of Roman rule had erased those memories—·and
thus extinguished those local loyalties·—the Roman grip
became secure. It was maintained even when the Romans
were warring against one another: in that inﬁghting each
·Roman governor· could rely on the support of the territory
he governed and had inﬂuence in, because once the families
of their former princes had been wiped out, the natives had
no authority they could recognize except that of the Romans.
If you bear all this in mind, you won’t be surprised by
how easily Alexander got a ﬁrm grip on Asia, or by how hard
it was for many others—Pyrrhus, for example—to retain the
territories they had conquered. This came not from these
conquerors’ differing in virtù but from a difference in the
characters of the states they had conquered.

9

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

5: How to govern. . .

How to govern cities or principalities that lived under their own laws

before they were annexed

Chapter 5

When a conqueror acquires a state that has been accustomed
to living under its own laws and in freedom [see Glossary], he
has three options if he wants to hold onto his conquest. He
can

(1) destroy it, ·smash everything·,
(2) go and live there himself,
(3) let them continue with their present system of laws,
while paying taxes to him, and setting up there a small
governing group who will keep the state friendly to
you [see Glossary].

Such a governing group, having been set up by the
·conquering· prince, will know that it can’t survive without
his friendly support; so it will do its best to maintain his
authority. Someone who wants to retain his hold on a city
accustomed to freedom will do best to get its citizens to
co-operate with him.

Consider the examples of the Spartans and the Romans.
The Spartans held Athens and Thebes, setting up a small
local government in each place; yet they lost them. The
Romans reduced Capua, Carthage, and Numantia to rubble
and ·therefore· didn’t lose them. They tried holding onto
Greece in pretty much the way the Spartans did, allowing
it to be free and to retain its old laws; and this failed. So
they had to destroy a good many ·Greek· cities in order to

hold onto the territory as a whole. The fact is that there is
no safe way to retain such a territory except by destroying
it. Someone who becomes master of a city accustomed to
freedom and doesn’t destroy it can expect to be destroyed by
it, because in rebellions the rebels will always rally to the
cry of Freedom! and to the old way of doing things—which
are never forgotten. . . . And whatever steps are taken to
prevent this, unless the people have fallen into disunity
among themselves, or have been scattered, they will always
remember the label ‘free’ and their old ways, and will rally to
them at every chance they get, as Pisa did after a century of
bondage to the Florentines.

But when a city or country has been used to living under
a prince, and his family has been exterminated, the people
won’t be able to choose from among themselves a new prince
to replace the old one; and having acquired the habit of
obedience. they won’t know how to live in freedom. So they’ll
be slow to take up arms, making it easier for an ·invading·
prince to win them over to his side. Republics, on the other
hand, have more vitality, more hatred, and a stronger desire
for revenge, which will never allow them to forget their former
freedom; so that the safest way is to destroy them or to go
and live among them.

10

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

6: Earned new principalities

New principalities that are acquired by one’s own arms and virtù

Chapter 6

I’m going to be dealing with entirely new principalities, and
in this discussion I’ll take the best examples of prince and of
state. There’s nothing surprising about this. People nearly
always walk in paths beaten by others, acting in imitation of
their deeds, but its never possible for them to keep entirely
to the beaten path or achieve the level of virtù of the models
you are imitating. A wise man will follow in the footsteps of
great men, imitating ones who have been supreme; so that if
his virtù doesn’t reach the level of theirs it will at least have
a touch of it. Compare an archer aiming at a distant target:
knowing the limits of his bow’s virtù he aims high, hoping
that the arrow as it descends will hit the target. So. . .

I say, therefore, that in an entirely new principality,
headed by someone who has only recently become a prince,
how much difﬁculty the conqueror has in keeping his new
acquired state depends on how much virtù he has—the more
virtù the less difﬁculty. Now, he can’t have risen from being
a private citizen to being a prince without ·help from· either
virtù or fortuna, and clearly either of those will somewhat
lessen of the difﬁculties ·in holding onto the new state·,
though undue reliance on fortuna doesn’t work well in the
long run. Another aid such a new prince will have is that,
having no other state ·where he can live as a prince·, he is
compelled to take up residence, personally, in his new state.
Now let us turn to ·the proper subject of this chapter,
namely· those who became princes by their own virtù and
not through fortuna. Moses, Cyrus, Romulus, Theseus, and
their like are the most excellent examples. In the case of
Moses, there isn’t much to discuss because he simply did

what God told him to do, though we should admire him for
being found worthy to have conversations with God. But
when we look into Cyrus and others who have acquired or
founded kingdoms, we’ll ﬁnd that they are all admirable;
and their actions and governing structures won’t be found
inferior to what Moses did under his great Instructor. And
in examining their lives and their achievements we don’t
ﬁnd them owing anything to fortuna beyond ·their initial·
opportunity, which brought them the material to shape as
they wanted. Without that opportunity their virtù of mind
would have come to nothing, and without that virtù the
opportunity wouldn’t have led to anything.

For the Israelites to be willing to follow Moses, he had
to •ﬁnd them in Egypt, enslaved and oppressed by the
Egyptians. For Romulus to become king of Rome and founder
of that state, he had to •be abandoned at birth, which led
to his leaving Alba. For Cyrus ·to achieve what he did·, he
had to •ﬁnd the Persians discontented with the government
of the Medes, and the Medes soft and effeminate through
their long peace. Theseus couldn’t have shown his virtù if
he hadn’t •found the Athenians ·defeated and· scattered. So
these •opportunities enabled those men to prosper, and their
great virtù enabled each to seize the opportunity to lead his
country to being noble and extremely prosperous.

Men like these who become princes through the exercise
of their own virtù ﬁnd it hard to •achieve that status but easy
to •keep it. One of the sources of difﬁculty in acquiring the
status of prince is their having to introduce new rules and
methods to establish their government and keep it secure.

11

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

6: Earned new principalities

We must bear in mind that nothing is

—more difﬁcult to set up,
—more likely to fail, and
—more dangerous to conduct,

than a new system of government; because the bringer of
the new system will make enemies of everyone who did well
under the old system, while those who may do well under
the new system still won’t support it warmly. Why not?
Partly because of fear of the opponents, who have the laws
on their side, and partly because men are hard to convince
of anything, and don’t really believe in new things until they
have had a long experience of them. So those who are hostile
will attack whenever they have the chance, while the others
will defend so half-heartedly that they don’t get the prince or
themselves out of danger.

For a thorough exploration of these matters, therefore, we
have to ask concerning these innovators—·these setters-up
of new states·—to carry through their projects

•must they depend on others, or can they rely on
themselves? that is,
•must they ask others for help or can they use force?
If they need help they are sure to fail, and won’t achieve
anything; but when they can rely on themselves and use
force they aren’t running much risk. That’s why armed
prophets always conquered, and the unarmed ones have
been destroyed. And along with all this there is the fact
that people don’t stay steady: it’s easy to persuade them of
something, but hard to keep them persuaded. When they
stop believing ·in their new prince·, force must be used to
make them believe; and provision for doing that must be
made beforehand.

If Moses, Cyrus, Theseus, and Romulus hadn’t had

soldiers at their command they couldn’t have enforced their
constitutions for long. (See what happened in our own day
to Father Girolamo Savonarola: he was overthrown, along
with his new scheme of things, as soon as the mass of
the people stopped believing in him, and he had no way of
keeping steadfast those who had believed or of converting
those who hadn’t.
[Savonarola, a ﬁerce puritan and mesmerizing
preacher, dominated Florence for four of the years when Machiavelli was
an ofﬁcial there.]) So the likes of these (·i.e. of Moses, Cyrus,
etc.·) ﬁnd it hard to reach their goal because there is great
danger on the way up, though their virtù will enable them to
overcome it; but when this has been done and the danger
is passed, and those who resented their success have been
exterminated, they will begin to be respected, and they will
continue afterwards powerful, secure, honoured, and happy.
A ﬁfth example is not on the same level as the other
four, but his case is somewhat like theirs, and I bring it
in as stand-in for all the other cases that are like it.
I
am, referring to Hiero the Syracusan [3rd century BCE]. From
being an ordinary citizen, this man rose to be the prince of
Syracuse; and he (·like the others·) owed nothing to fortuna
except the opportunity:
in a time of military threat, the
Syracusans chose him to head their troops. afterwards they
rewarded him by making him their prince. He was of such
great virtù even as an ordinary citizen that someone wrote of
him that ‘He had everything he needed to be a king except a
kingdom’. He abolished the old army and established a new
one, gave up old alliances and made new ones; and that gave
him the foundation—his own soldiers, his own allies—on
which he could build anything he wanted to build. Thus, it
was very hard for him to acquire something, ·his position of
power·, that he had little trouble holding onto.

12

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

7: Unearned new principalities

New principalities acquired by the arms and the fortuna of others

Chapter 7

Those who are raised purely by fortuna from being private
citizens to being princes don’t have much trouble rising,
just ﬂoating up; but they ﬁnd it hard to stay up there. I’m
referring (a) to men to whom a state is given, as happened
to many in Greece, in the cities of Ionia and the Hellespont,
where Darius enthroned princes who were to hold the cities
in the interests of his security and his glory; and (b) to
men who bought their states, rising to the rank of emperor
through the corruption of the soldiers. [In 193 CE the Praetorian
Guard in Rome murdered the emperor and then put the city and its
empire up for auction; a man named Julianus made the winning bid,
was designated as emperor, and lived and ruled for 66 days.] Such
people—·in category (a) especially·—depend entirely on two
extremely unreliable and unstable things, namely the sup-
port and the fortuna of whoever raised them to the status
of prince. Such a man won’t have either the knowledge or
the power to keep his position. Knowledge: unless he has an
extremely high level of ability and virtù he can’t be expected
to know how to command, having always lived as an ordinary
citizen. Power: he won’t have an army that he can rely on to
be friendly and loyal.

States that come into existence suddenly, like everything
in nature that is born and grows fast, can’t have roots and
connections that will save them from being blown down by
the ﬁrst storm; unless (I repeat) the suddenly-elevated prince
has so much virtù that he knows he must immediately set
to work to make sure of his hold on what fortuna has given
him, laying the foundations that another leader might have
laid •before becoming a prince rather than •afterwards.

I’ll illustrate these two ways of becoming a prince—though
virtù and through fortuna—by considering two examples
from our own times, namely Francesco Sforza and Cesare
Borgia. By choosing the appropriate means, and with great
virtù, Sforza went from being a commoner to being Duke of
Milan, and he hadn’t much trouble holding onto the power
that it had cost him so much effort to get in the ﬁrst place.
In contrast with this, Cesare Borgia—commonly called Duke
Valentino—acquired his state through the fortuna of his
father ·Pope Alexander VI·, and when his father died he
lost it, despite having taken every measure that a wise and
virtuoso man should take to give himself ﬁrm foundations
in the state that the army and fortuna of someone else had
given him.

Someone who didn’t lay his foundations before achieving
power may be able with great virtù to lay them afterwards,
but this will involve trouble for the architect and danger to
the building. If we look carefully at everything Borgia did,
we’ll see that he did lay solid foundations for his future power;
and I think it is worthwhile to discuss his efforts because I
don’t know any better advice to give a new prince than ‘Follow
the example of Cesare Borgia’. His arrangements failed; but
that wasn’t because of any fault in him but because of the
extraordinary and extreme hostility of fortuna.

Alexander VI, wanting to achieve greatness for the duke,
his son, faced many obstacles, present and future. Firstly,
he didn’t see how he could make him master of any state
that wasn’t a part of the Church’s territory; and he knew
that if he stole land from the Church, the Duke of Milan and

13

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

7: Unearned new principalities

the Venetians wouldn’t consent to that. . . . Furthermore, he
saw that the ·mercenary· armies in Italy, especially those
that might have helped him, were in the hands of rulers who
had reason to fear his growing power, namely the Orsini and
Colonnesi clans and their allies. What he had to do, then,
was to upset this state of affairs and create turmoil in the
states of these rivals, so as to get away with seizing control of
a part of them. This was easy for him to do, because he found
that the Venetians, for reasons of their own, were planning
to bring the French back into Italy; and the Pope, far from
opposing this, made it easier to bring about by dissolving
the former marriage of King Louis. So the French king came
into Italy with Venetian help and the Pope’s consent. No
sooner was the king in possession of Milan than he supplied
the Pope with soldiers for the attempt on Romagna, which
yielded to him because he had the support of the king. ·The
Pope’s son, Cesare Borgia = Duke Valentino, was commander
of the Pope’s army.· The duke, having acquired Romagna
and beaten the Colonna family, wanted to hold onto that
and to advance further, but he was hindered by two things:
•his suspicion that the army wasn’t loyal to him, and •his
worries about the attitude of France. He was afraid that
the forces of the Orsini family, which he was using, would
stop obeying his orders and not only block him from winning
more territory but even take for themselves what he had
already won; and his fears about the French king were pretty
much the same. His doubts about the Orsini ·soldiers· were
conﬁrmed when, after Faenza had been taken, he saw how
half-heartedly they went into the attack on Bologna. And he
learned which way King Louis was leaning when he (Cesare
Borgia) went on from taking the Duchy of Urbino to attack
Tuscany, and the king made him turn back. This led him
to a decision never again to rely on the arms and fortuna of
anyone else.

[Reminder:

He began by weakening the Orsini and Colonna factions
in Rome by winning over to his side all their supporters who
were gentlemen [see Glossary], making them his gentlemen,
paying them well, and giving them military commands or
governmental positions, each according to his rank. Within
a few months they were all cut off from their former factions
and entirely attached to the duke.
this is Duke
Valentino = Cesare Borgia.] In this way he scattered the Colonna
family’s adherents; and then he waited for an opportunity
to crush the Orsini. This came to him soon and he used it
well. The Orsini had at last come to realize that the growing
power of the duke and the Church would be their ruin; so
they came together for a ·planning· meeting at Magione near
Perugia. This gave rise to a rebellion at Urbino and riots in
Romagna, with endless dangers to the duke, all of which
he overcame with the help of the French. Having restored
•his credibility, and not wanting to rely on the French or any
other outside forces to preserve •it, he resorted to trickery.
He was so good at concealing his intentions that he got
the Orsini to be willing to be reconciled with him.
(His
intermediary in this process was Paolo Orsini, whom the
duke reassured with all sorts of courtesy—money, clothes,
and horses.) The Orsini were so naive that they went ·at
his invitation· to Sinigalia, where they were in his power. [In
a separate essay that wasn’t published until after his death, Machiavelli
describes in details how Cesare Borgia went about murdering the top
people of the Orsini faction, including Paolo Orsini; and Oliverotto de
Fermo, of whom we shall hear more on page 18.] By exterminating
the ·Orsini· leaders and making allies of their supporters,
the duke laid solid foundations for his power, having all of
Romagna and the Duchy of Urbino in his grip; and he won
the support of the people, who were beginning to appreciate
the prosperity ·brought to them by his rule·.

14

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

7: Unearned new principalities

I want to spend a bit longer on this last matter, because it
is important and deserves to be imitated by others. When the
duke occupied Romagna he found it under the rule of weak
masters, who •preferred robbing their subjects to governing
them, and •gave them more cause for dissension than for
unity, with the result that the territory was full of robbery,
feuds, and every kind of lawlessness. Wanting to restore
peace and obedience to authority, the duke thought he had
to give it some good government, and to that end he gave
complete control to Ramiro d’Orco, a man who always acted
decisively and ruthlessly. It didn’t take long for this man to
restore peace and unity, getting a considerable reputation for
himself. But the duke came to think that extreme severity
was going to make him hated by the populace; so he set up a
single court of judgment for the whole of Romagna—a court
with a most excellent presiding judge, to which all the cities
could send their advocates. He knew that d’Orco’s severity
had caused some hatred against himself, and wanted to
clear that out from the minds of the people and win them
over to himself; so he set out to show that if there had been
any cruelty its source was not •him but rather •the brutal
nature of his minister. At the ﬁrst opportunity he had d’Orco
arrested and cut in two [= ‘beheaded’], leaving the pieces on the
piazza at Cesena with the block and a bloody knife beside
it. This brutal spectacle gave the people a jolt, but it also
reassured them.

But now back to my main theme. Borgia had acquired an
army of his own, and had pretty much destroyed the armies
in his vicinity that could make trouble for him; so that now
his power was consolidated and he was fairly well secured
against immediate dangers; and he saw that if he wanted to
conquer more territories he needed the support of the King of
France, which he knew he couldn’t get because the king had
belatedly come to realize that it was a mistake to ally himself

with Cesare Borgia. So he began to seek new alliances, and
to hang back from helping France against the Spaniards in
the French attempt to conquer the kingdom of Naples. His
intention was to make himself secure against the French,
and he would quickly have brought this off if ·his father·
Pope Alexander hadn’t died ·a few months later·.

That’s how Borgia handled his immediate problems. For
the longer term, he had to prepare for the possibility that
Alexander VI might be succeeded by a pope who wasn’t
friendly to him and might try to take back from him the
territory that Alexander had given him. For this purpose he
made four plans:

(1) To exterminate the families of the lords he had dis-
possessed, so as to deprive the Pope of that excuse for
interfering.

(2) To win the gentlemen [see Glossary] of Rome over to his
side, so as to have their help in hemming the pope in.
(3) To increase his control over the college ·of cardinals,

which would elect the next pope·.

(4) To acquire as much territory as he could while Pope
Alexander was alive, so as to be well placed to resist
with his own resources any attack ·by the new pope·.
By the time Alexander died, the duke had managed three out
of four: he had (1) killed as many of the dispossessed lords
as he could lay hands on, which was most of them, (2) won
over the Roman gentlemen, and (3) brought onto his side a
large majority of the college of cardinals. As for (4) further
conquests, he planned to become master of Tuscany, thus:
He already held Perugia and Piombino, and Pisa
was under his protection. He no longer had to
fear anything from the French direction (because
the Spaniards had robbed France of the kingdom of
Naples, so that both sides had to buy his support);
so he felt free to pounce down on Pisa. When he

15

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

7: Unearned new principalities

had done that, Lucca and Siena would immediately
capitulate, partly out of fear and partly out of hostility
to the Florentines; and the Florentines couldn’t have
done anything about it.

If Cesare Borgia had achieved all this (and he was almost
there when Alexander died), he would have acquired so much
power and prestige that he could have stood on his own feet,
relying solely on his own power and virtù and not on the
fortuna and military power of anyone else.

But Alexander did die, ·a mere· ﬁve years after his son
had ﬁrst drawn the sword. The duke’s condition at that time
was this:

•He had ﬁrm control of Romagna;
•His other planned conquests were up in the air.
•He was caught between two powerful hostile armies.
•He was mortally ill.

[This illness, which he survived, was the same one that had just killed
his father, Pope Alexander.] But the duke •had so much ferocity
and virtù, and •understood so well that men must be either
won over or killed, and •had (in the short time available)
laid such ﬁrm foundations, that he would have surmounted
every obstacle if the French and Spanish armies hadn’t been
bearing down on him, or if he had been in good health. It’s
clear that the foundations he had laid were indeed solid, for
Romagna waited for him for more than a month. And he
was safe in Rome, although half-dead; the Baglioni, Vitelli,
and Orsini factions came to Rome, but couldn’t stir things
up against him.
If he had been in good health when his
father died, he would have managed everything easily: ·for
example·, he couldn’t have dictated who would be the next
pope, but he could have blocked the election of any candidate
he didn’t want. On the day that Julius II was elected as pope,
the duke himself told me that he had thought of all the
problems that might occur when his father died, and had

16

solutions for them all, except that it hadn’t occurred to him
that when his father died he himself would be at death’s
door.

Having set out all the duke’s actions, I can’t ﬁnd anything
to criticise; indeed, he seems to me (I repeat) to be a model
for anyone who comes to power through fortuna and ·with
help from· the arms of others. ·A ‘model’, although he failed?
Yes·, because his great courage and high ambitions wouldn’t
have allowed him to act differently from how he did; and
he failed only because his father’s life was so short and he
himself was so ill. So a new ruler who thinks he has to

•secure himself in his new principality,
•win friends,
•overcome obstacles either by force or fraud,
•make himself loved and feared by the people,
•be followed and respected by his soldiers,
•exterminate potential enemies,
•replace old laws by new ones,
•be severe and gracious, magnanimous and liberal,
•break up a disloyal army and create a new one,
•maintain friendship with kings and princes, so that
they must openly help him or be very careful about
harming him,

can’t ﬁnd a livelier example than the actions of this man. The
only thing he can be criticised for is the election of Julius
II as pope—a bad choice! As I have already said, the duke
wasn’t in a position to decide who would be the new pope;
but he could block the election of anyone he didn’t want, and
he ought never to have allowed the election of any cardinal
(1) whom he had injured or (2) who as pope would have
reason to fear him. Men harm one another either from fear
or from hatred. (1) The cardinals he had harmed included,
among others,

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

8: Principality obtained through wickedness

the cardinal of San Pietro ad Vincula,
the cardinal of San Giorgio, and
Ascanio Sforza.

[The ﬁrst cardinal on that list is the one who became Pope Julius II.]
(2) And each of the other cardinals had reason to fear him
if he (the cardinal) became pope, except for the Cardinal of

Rouen and the Spanish cardinals. [Machiavelli gives reasons
for these exceptions. Then:] So the duke’s ﬁrst choice for
pope should have been one of the Spanish cardinals, failing
which the cardinal of Rouen, and not the cardinal of San
Pietro ad Vincula. Anyone who thinks that new beneﬁts
will cause great men to forget old injuries is wrong. Borgia
miscalculated in this papal election, and that error was fatal.

Chapter 8

Principality obtained through wickedness

Of the ways in which a private person can rise to be a prince
there are two that aren’t entirely matters of fortuna or virtù.
I can’t pass them by in silence, though I shan’t deal with
them as fully as I would in a book about republics. They are
these:

•Someone raises himself to being a prince through
some really wicked conduct. ·This will be the topic of
the present chapter·.
•A citizen becomes the prince of his country by the
·I’ll discuss this in
support of his fellow-citizens.
chapter 9·.

My treatment of the ﬁrst of these will consist in presenting
two examples—one ancient, the other modern—without go-
ing into the merits of such a procedure. These two examples,
I think, will provide enough instruction for anyone who has
to go that way.

(1) Agathocles was a Sicilian who, starting not merely as
an ordinary citizen but as a very low-class one (his father
was a potter), became King of Syracuse. He was a scoundrel
from the day he was born; but he accompanied his infamies
with so much virtù of mind and body that, having joined the
Syracusan army, he rose through its ranks to be commander
in chief. Being established in that position, he decided to
become ·Syracuse’s· prince and to use force—with no help
from anyone else—to hold onto the power that had been
given to him ·and to upgrade it to the power of a prince·. He
discussed his plans with Hamilcar, a Carthaginian whose
army was at that time ﬁghting in Sicily. [This was not the famous
Hamilcar, father of Hannibal, who led the ﬁrst Carthaginian war against
Rome a few decades later.] Then one morning he assembled the
people and the senate of Syracuse, as if he had public affairs
to discuss with them; at an agreed signal his soldiers killed
all the senators and the richest of the people; and with these

17

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

8: Principality obtained through wickedness

out of the way, Agathocles seized and held the principality of
that city without any trouble from the people. And although
the Carthaginians routed him twice and eventually laid siege
to Syracuse, he was able not only to defend his city but
also to take some of his men to attack Africa [see Glossary],
and before long the siege of Syracuse was lifted, and the
Carthaginians, at the end of their tether, were compelled to
come to terms with Agathocles, leaving Sicily to him and
settling for the possession of Africa.

If you study the actions and the career of this man, you’ll
see little if anything that could be attributed to fortuna: he
became a prince, as we have just seen, not through anyone’s
favour but by steadily rising in the military profession, each
promotion involving countless difﬁculties and dangers; and
once he had his principality he held onto it, boldly, through
many hostilities and dangers. ·And you won’t see anything
you could attribute to virtù either, for· it can’t be called virtù
to kill one’s fellow-citizens, to deceive friends, to be without
faith or mercy or religion; such methods may bring power
but won’t bring glory.
Machiavelli’s next sentence: Perché, se si considerassi la
virtù di Agatocle nello intrare e nello uscire de’ periculi, e
la grandezza dello animo suo nel sopportare e superare le
cose avverse, non si vede perché elli abbia ad essere iudicato
inferiore a qualunque eccellentissimo capitano.
That literally means: Because if we consider Agathocles’ virtù
in confronting and surviving dangers, and his courage in
enduring and overcoming hardships, there’s no apparent
reason for judging him to be inferior to the most successful
military leaders.
What Machiavelli may have meant: As for Agathocles’ ability
to confront and survive dangers, and his courage in enduring
and overcoming hardships—if these are considered as virtù

then there’s no reason not to admire him as much as the
most successful military leaders.
But his barbarous cruelty and inhumanity with inﬁnite
wickedness do not permit him to be celebrated among the
most excellent men ·and therefore it isn’t right to count
his striking attributes as virtù. So, summing up·, what he
achieved can’t be attributed either to fortuna or to virtù.

(2) In our times, during the papacy of Alexander VI,
Oliverotto da Fermo, having been left an orphan many years
before, was brought up by his maternal uncle Giovanni
Fogliani; and when still quite young he was sent to serve
as a soldier under Paolo Vitelli, so that he could get some
training that would enable him to have a successful military
career. After Paolo died, he served under Paolo’s brother
Vitellozzo, and before long his resourcefulness and strength
of body and mind made him Vitellozzo’s top ofﬁcer. But
he had no enthusiasm for serving along with others ·and
therefore under someone else’s command·; so he decided to
seize Fermo, with Vitellozzo’s support and help from some
citizens of Fermo to whom the slavery of their country was
dearer than its freedom [see Glossary]. He wrote to ·his uncle·
Giovanni Fogliani, to the following effect:

Having been away from home for many years, he
wanted to visit his uncle and his city, and to have a
look at the land his father had left him. He hadn’t
worked to acquire anything except honour, ·and so
couldn’t return home with an ostentatious display of
wealth·. But he wanted to return in style, so that
the citizens should see he hadn’t been wasting his
time in the military; so he would be accompanied by a
hundred of his friends and servants, all on horseback;
and he asked Giovanni to have the Fermians receive
him with a suitable ceremony—to honour not only
himself but also his uncle and guardian Giovanni.

18

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

8: Principality obtained through wickedness

Giovanni ensured that his nephew received every courtesy.
He caused him to be ceremoniously received by the Fermians,
and lodged him in his own house. After some days there,
making the needed arrangements for his wicked plan, Oliv-
erotto laid on a grand banquet to which he invited Giovanni
Fogliani and the top men of Fermo. When the eating was
over, and all the other entertainments that are usual in such
banquets were ﬁnished, Oliverotto cunningly began some
solemn talk about the greatness of Pope Alexander and his
son Cesare, and of their enterprises; Giovanni and others
joined in the conversation, but Oliverotto suddenly stood
up and said that such matters should be discussed in a
more private place; and he went into another room, with
Giovanni and the other citizens following him. No sooner
were they seated than soldiers emerged from hiding-places
and slaughtered them all, Giovanni included. After this mas-
sacre Oliverotto ·and his followers· mounted on horseback
and sped through the town to the palace of the governor;
they laid siege to the palace, so frightening the governor that
he was forced to obey him and form a government of which
he (Oliverotto) made himself the prince. Having killed all the
dissentients who might hit back at him, he strengthened his
position with new rules and regulations governing civil and
military matters; so that in his one year as prince in Fermo
he not only made himself secure within the city but also
came to be feared by all his neighbours. He would have been
as difﬁcult to destroy as Agathocles was if he hadn’t—as I
reported earlier [page 14]—allowed himself to be deceived by
Cesare Borgia, who netted him along with the Orsini and
Vitelli at Sinigalia, where one year after the massacre, he
was strangled, together with Vitellozzo, whom he had made
his leader in virtù and wickedness.

Some may wonder how a man like Agathocles, after

countless treacheries and cruelties, could live for years
secure in his country, and defend himself from external
enemies, and never be conspired against by his own citizens;
seeing that many others who have also used cruelty haven’t
been able to hold onto their ruling positions in peacetime, let
alone in the insecure times of war. I believe that it depends
on whether cruelty is employed well or badly. (1) Cruel acts
are used well (if we can apply ‘well’ to wicked acts) if they are
needed for political security and are all committed at a single
stroke and then discontinued or turned into something that
is to the advantage of the subjects. (2) Cruel acts are badly
used when, even if there are few of them at the outset, their
number grows through time. Those who practise (1) the ﬁrst
system may be able to improve somewhat their standing in
the eyes of God and men, as Agathocles did. Those who
follow (2) the other can’t possibly maintain themselves.

So someone who is seizing a state should think hard
about all the injuries he’ll have to inﬂict, and get them all
over with at the outset, rather than having cruelty as a
daily occurrence. By stopping cruelty very soon, the usurper
will be able to reassure people and win them over to his
side by generosity. Someone who doesn’t proceed in this
way—whether from fear or on bad advice—will always have
to have a knife in his hand; and he won’t be able to rely
on his subjects, who will be alienated by his continued and
repeated injuries. . . .

Above all things, a prince ought to relate to his people
in such a way that nothing that happens, good or bad, will
make him change his course. In troubled times you won’t be
able to ﬁx the trouble by moving towards greater harshness,
because it will be too late for that; nor will it help for you to
move in the direction of greater mildness, because that will
seem to have been compelled, and you’ll get no credit for it.

19

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

9: Civil principality

Chapter 9

Civil principality

·At the start of chapter 8 I spoke of two ways of becoming a
prince that aren’t entirely matters of fortuna or of virtù. And·
now I come to the second of them: a citizen becomes the
prince of his country not by wickedness or any intolerable
violence, but by the favour of his fellow citizens. We can
call this ‘civil principality’. [Machiavelli adds in parentheses
that what you need to become a civil prince is just una
astuzia fortunata = a fortunate or happy or lucky cleverness
or astuteness. What you don’t need, he says, is o tutta virtù
o tutta fortuna, a phrase that has given trouble to translators.
Here are four published translations of it:
•nor is genius or fortune altogether necessary to attain to it.
•the prince doesn’t have to depend wholly on skill or Fortune.
•you don’t have to be wholly brilliant or extraordinarily lucky.
•it is not necessary to have only ability or only good luck.
Take your pick! Machiavelli continues:] Now, this kind of
principality—·this way of becoming a prince·—is obtained
with the support of the common people or with the support
of the nobles. Every city-state has •common people who
don’t want to be ruled or ordered around by the nobles, and
•nobles who do want to rule and order around the common
people; and the conﬂict between these two opposite political
drives results, in each city, in one of three things: a ·civil·
principality, freedom [see Glossary], or ungoverned chaos.

Whether a civil principality is created by the people or
by the nobles depends on which group has the opportunity.
When the nobles see that they can’t resist popular pressure,
they

•select one of their number,
•praise him to the skies, and
•make him a prince;

hoping to be able, under his shadow, to get what they want.
When the people ﬁnd that they can’t resist the nobles, they

•select one of their number,
•praise him to the skies, and
•make him a prince;

hoping that his authority will be a defence for them. Someone
who becomes prince with the help of the nobles will ﬁnd it
hard to maintain his position because he’ll be surrounded by
men who regard themselves as his equals, which will inhibit
him in giving orders and managing affairs. It is easier for a
prince who got there with the help of popular favour: he’ll
be able to exercise his principality single-handed, with few if
any people unwilling to obey him.

Furthermore, a prince can’t satisfy the nobles without
acting wrongly and harming others, because what the nobles
want is to oppress the people; whereas he can satisfy the
people without harming anyone, because their desires are
more honourable than those of the nobles—all the people
want is not to be oppressed. Also, a prince can’t secure
himself against a hostile people, because there are too many
of them, whereas he can secure himself from the nobles
because there aren’t many of them. ·I should add a few words
explaining what the content is of ‘secure himself against. . . ’,
i.e. what the threats are from those two directions·. The
worst that a prince can expect if the people turn hostile
people is that they will abandon him; but if the nobles turn

20

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

9: Civil principality

hostile he has to fear not only that they will •abandon him
but also that they will •attack him. ·The nobles are more
likely to attack than the people are, because· they look ahead
further and more intelligently than the people do, and will
always act •early so as to protect themselves from dangers
•further down the line, and so as to obtain favours from
whomever they expect to win. ·In one respect, though, the
people are more of a threat than the nobles, namely·: The
prince has to live always with the same people, but he doesn’t
have to have always the same nobles, because he can make
and unmake nobles every day, giving or taking away honours
at will.

I’ll try to set all this out more clearly. The ﬁrst question
that you, ·as prince·, ought to ask about any noble is: Does
he behave in a way that ties •his success in everything to
•yours? If he does, and isn’t greedy, he should be honoured
and loved. As for those who don’t tie their success to yours,
there are two cases to consider. (1) The reason why a given
noble doesn’t link his success with yours may be that he
is feeble and a coward. This is a man you should make
use of, especially if he has good advice to offer.
In times
of prosperity he will bring you honour, and when things go
badly you won’t have fear anything from him. (2) A noble
who doesn’t commit himself to you because he has ambitious
plans of his own shows that he is giving more thought to
himself than to you; and a prince ought to keep a watchful
eye on this man, fearing him as though he were an open
enemy, because in difﬁcult times that’s just what he will be.
Someone who becomes a prince through popular favour,
then, ought to keep the people friendly towards him, and
this isn’t difﬁcult because all they ask of him is that he
not oppress them. But someone who becomes a prince
through the favour of the nobles against the people’s wishes
should make it his ﬁrst priority to win the people over to

himself. And he can easily do this, by taking them under
his protection. When men are well treated by someone, the
loyalty they’ll have towards their benefactor will be especially
great if they had expected him to treat them badly. . . . The
prince can win their affections in many ways, but I shan’t
go into those because they are too various, depending on
circumstances, to be brought under ﬁxed rules. The bottom
line is simply this: a prince must have the people friendly
towards him; otherwise he has no security in difﬁcult times.
Nabis, prince of the Spartans, successfully defended his
country and his government against an attack by all Greece,
and by a victorious Roman army; to overcome this peril he
had to make himself secure against a few ·of his subjects·,
but a mere few wouldn’t have been sufﬁcient if the people
had been hostile to him. Don’t challenge what I am saying
here by producing the trite proverb that ‘He who builds on
the people builds on mud’, for this is ·not unrestrictedly
true. The proverb is· true when a private citizen builds
his power on that foundation, persuading himself that the
people will free him when he is oppressed by his enemies or
by the magistrates; that would-be prince may very well be
disappointed by the outcome, as were the Gracchi in Rome
and Giorgio Scali in Florence. But if it’s a prince who has
established himself on popular favour—a prince who

•knows how to lead,
•is brave,
•keeps his head in a crisis,
•takes the right precautions, and
•by his own resolution and energy keeps the whole
people encouraged

—he won’t be disappointed; it will turn out that he laid good
foundations ·for his power·.

This kind of prince is most at risk when he is passing
·Let us look at why

from •civil to •absolute government.

21

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

10: Measuring the strength of principalities

this is so·. The prince in question rules either personally
or through magistrates.
If through magistrates, that is
a source of weakness and insecurity in his government,
because it rests entirely on the goodwill of the citizens who
have been raised to the magistracy, and who can, especially
in troubled times, easily destroy the government through
intrigue or open deﬁance. And at such times the prince won’t
be able to exercise absolute authority because his subjects,
accustomed as they are to getting orders from magistrates,
aren’t going to start taking orders from him in a time of
crisis.

Also, at such times there will always be a scarcity of men
the prince can trust. He can’t rely on what he sees when
things are quiet and the citizens need the government. At

such times

•everyone comes running,
•everyone promises ·to do what he wants·,
•everyone wants to die for him (when there’s no imme-
diate prospect of death).

But in troubled times, when the government needs the
citizens, he ﬁnds that very few show up. ·Mightn’t the prince
at least try relying on the citizens’ loyalty?· That would be a
risky experiment, made all the more dangerous by the fact
that it can be tried only once. So a shrewd prince ought to
handle things in such a way that his citizens will always, in
all circumstances, need the government and need him; then
he will always ﬁnd them loyal.

How to measure the strength of a principality

Chapter 10

In examining the character of ·any one of· these principalities,
we have to face the question: Does this prince (1) have
enough power to be able to rely on his own resources in time
of need, or does he (2) have to get help from others? Let me
be clear about the line I am drawing. It is between

(1) the prince who has enough men or money to be able
to raise a sufﬁcient army to join battle against any
attacker, and

(2) the prince who can’t show himself against the enemy
in the ﬁeld, and has to shelter behind the walls of his
city, ·waiting for help to come·.

I have discussed (1) ·in chapter 6· and will return to it
·in chapters 12–14·. All I can say about (2) is to advise
such princes to provision and fortify their •cities, and not
to defend their •rural areas. If a prince has fortiﬁed his city
well, and has managed his subjects concerns in the way I
have described and will return to later, others will be very
cautious about attacking him. Men are never enthusiastic
about enterprises that they can see will be difﬁcult, and it
will be seen to be difﬁcult to attack a ruler who has his city
well fortiﬁed and isn’t hated by his people.

22

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

10: Measuring the strength of principalities

The cities of Germany are absolutely independent [liberis-
sime]; they have little rural territory; they obey the emperor
when it suits them to; and they aren’t afraid of the emperor
or of any of their neighbours. That’s because they are so
well fortiﬁed that everyone thinks it would be tedious and
difﬁcult to take them: they all have good moats and walls,
enough artillery, and public depots with enough food, drink,
and fuel to last a year. Also, to support the people without
public expenditure ·on hand-outs·, they have a stock of raw
materials that will provide a year’s work in trades that are
the city’s life-blood and ·thus· a year’s wages for the workers
in them. They also have respect for •military exercises, and
have many rules to make sure that •they are held.

Thus, a prince who has a strong city and hasn’t made
himself hated won’t be attacked; anyone who did attack him
would be driven off, humiliated, because this world is so
changeable that it’s almost impossible to keep an army idle,
besieging a city, for a whole year. Someone may object:

If the people have property outside the city, and see it
burnt, they won’t remain patient; the long siege and
self-interest will make them forget their prince.

I reply that a strong and energetic prince will overcome all
such difﬁculties by giving his subjects hope that the trouble
will soon be over, scaring them with tales of the enemy’s
cruelty, and moving nimbly to protect himself from those of
his subjects who seem to him to be too bold.

Also, as the enemy approach the city they will, naturally,
burn and ruin the countryside; this will happen at a time
when the spirits of the people are still high and they are
determined to resist. This should actually encourage the
prince, because a few days later, when spirits have cooled,
the damage is already done, the bad things have happened,
and there’s no remedy for them; so the people will be all the
more ready to support their prince, because he seems to be
under obligations to them now that their houses have been
burnt and their possessions ruined in his defence. ·They will
support him because he is obliged to them? Yes·, because it’s
human nature to be bound by the beneﬁts one gives as much
as by those one receives. All things considered, therefore,
it won’t be hard for a wise prince to keep the minds of his
citizens steadfast throughout a siege, as long as they have
food and weapons.

23

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

11: Ecclesiastical principalities

Chapter 11

Ecclesiastical principalities

·Up to here I have been discussing kinds of state and ways
of become a prince. I am nearly ﬁnished with that whole
topic·. All that is left for me to discuss are ecclesiastical
principalities—·church states·. The difﬁculties that occur
in relation to these concern what happens on the way to
getting possession, because once such a principality has
been acquired, whether by virtù or by fortuna, it can be held
onto without either. That’s because church states are backed
by ancient religious institutions that are so powerful and
of such a character that their princes can stay in power no
matter how they behave and live. These are the only princes
who have states that they don’t defend, and subjects whom
they don’t rule; and the states, although unguarded, are not
taken from them, and the subjects, don’t mind not being
ruled and don’t want to alienate themselves and have no way
of doing so. These are the only principalities that are secure
and happy. But they’re upheld by ·divine· powers to which
the human mind can’t reach, so I shan’t say anything more
about them. They are raised up and maintained by God, and
it would be presumptuous and rash to discuss them.

·Except for one matter·. Someone may want to ask:

How does it come about that the Church has so greatly
increased its temporal [see Glossary] power? Before the
papacy of Alexander VI the Italian rulers (not only of
the great states, but every baron and lord, however
minor) regarded the ·Church’s· temporal power as
almost negligible; but now a king of France trembles
before it, and it has been able to drive him from Italy
and to ruin the Venetians. What happened?

24

Though the answer is well known, it may be worthwhile for
us to remind ourselves of it.

Before King Charles VIII of France moved into Italy, this

country was dominated by

•the popes,
•the Venetians,
•the King of Naples,
•the Duke of Milan, and
•the Florentines.

Each of these powers had two main concerns: (i) that no
foreign army should enter Italy, and (ii) none of the other
four should seize more territory. Those about whom there
was the most anxiety were the popes and the Venetians. The
Venetians could be held back only by the other three working
together. . . .; and to keep down the popes the others made
use of the barons of Rome. They were split into two factions,
the Orsinis and the Colonnas, who were always on the brink
of outright ﬁghting; so there they were, weapons at the ready,
under the eyes of the Pope, and this kept the papacy weak
and indecisive. . . . The brevity of each individual papacy
contributed to this. Popes have on average reigned for ten
years, and that is hardly enough for a pope to pull down
one of the factions; and if, for example, one pope came near
to destroying the Colonnas, he would be succeeded by one
who was hostile to the Orsinis; that successor would pull the
Colonnas up again, but wouldn’t have enough time to ruin
the Orsinis. That’s why the popes’ temporal powers weren’t
given much respect in Italy.

The Prince

Niccolò Machiavelli

11: Ecclesiastical principalities

Then came Pope Alexander VI, who more than any previ-
ous pope showed what a pope could do with money and arms.
Using Duke Valentino—·Cesare Borgia·—and exploiting the
opportunity provided by the French invasion of Italy, he did
all the things that I mentioned ·in chapter 7· when discussing
the duke’s actions. His aim was to build up the duke, not the
Church, but his actions did make the Church more powerful;
and that increased power was the legacy that was left to the
Church after Alexander’s death and the downfall of his son.
After Alexander there was Pope Julius II, who found the
Church strong: it had control of all of Romagna, and the
Roman barons and their factions had been wiped out by
Alexander’s severity. Julius also found the way open to a
way for the Church to accumulate money—a way that had
never been followed before Alexander VI. Julius didn’t just
follow these policies; he improved upon them. He planned
to capture Bologna, to squelch the Venetians, and to chase
the French out of Italy. He succeeded in all of this; and

what makes this especially creditable is that he did it to
strengthen the Church and not to beneﬁt any private person,
·as Alexander sought to beneﬁt his son·. He also kept the
Orsini and Colonna factions within the bounds in which he
found them; and although a few of their leaders were poised
to make trouble, two things held them back: •the greatness
of the Church, with which Julius terriﬁed them; and •their
not having their own cardinals. When these factions have
their cardinals they don’t remain quiet for long, because
cardinals take sides, both inside Rome and out of it, and
the barons are compelled to support them.
In this way
the ambitions of prelates generate disorders and tumults
among the barons. For these reasons his holiness Pope Leo
X—·formerly the Cardinal de’ Medici·—found the papacy in a
very strong condition, and it is to be hoped that where others
made it great through force, he will make it even greater
and more venerated through his goodness and his countless
other virtùs.

25


